--- 
title: Learn Python by doing. Create simple calculator.
date: 2022-12-10 12:25:00 +100
categories: [python-tutorial]
tags: [python, learning, tutorial, programming-language]
mermaid: true
---
### Overview
<i class="fa-solid fa-calculator"></i>

In this tutorial you will learn basics of programming in Python in 10 simple steps:
1. Install and setup software: Python interpreter and VS Code.
2. Learn how to print data in Terminal
3. Learn how to enter data in Terminal
4. Learn variables.
5. Learn Strings
6. Learn how to do Math in Python.
7. Learn Conditional Statements.
8. Learn Functions.
9. Learn the While Loop.

You are going to learn it by doing. Together, we're going to create a simple calculator and add more and more functionality to it with each step above. 

You might be wondering what are all those things in the steps above and why do we need them? The answer is that they are the most fundamental blocks of knowledge in any programming language. 

It might be hard to see how they make sense at this moment and even while you learn them individually. However a big picture will arise once you put enough efforts into the practice. 

Here are some tips on how to go through the tutorial:
- Code along in the Theory sections.
- Try to resolve the Practice exercises by yourself. 
- If you can't make it, don't worry. I provided solutions everywhere.

### Step 1: Install tools

To get started we need to install following software:
- Python itself - allows us to run python programs.
- VS Code - allows us to easily write code.

Install Python:
1. Go to Python [website](https://www.python.org/downloads/)  or google "python download" 
2. Click the download button.
3. Execute the installation file once it is downloaded.
4. Follow the normal installation steps. 
> When installing make sure to check the add to PATH checkbox. 
    {: .prompt-info }

Install VS Code:
1. Go to their [website](https://code.visualstudio.com/download) or google "VS Code download"
2. Click the download button. 
3. Execute the installation file once it is downloaded.
4. Follow the normal installation steps. 
> When installing make sure to check the add to PATH checkbox.
    {: .prompt-info }


### Step 2: Setup VS Code

Install VS Code extensions:
1. Open VS Code
2. On the left-hand side click to Extensions.
3. Search and install following extensions:
     1. Python (Microsoft) 
   - helps you to write Python code by giving you tips and hints.
   - checks the code for syntactic errors and helps you to find them quickly.
     2. Code Spell Checker
   - Helps to find spelling errors. 

Update settings. 
- Go to File -> Preferences -> Settings:
    1. **Auto save.** Set it to afterDelay.
       - As the name states, automatically saves your work each second.
    2. **Bracket Pair Colorization.** Set it to Enabled by clicking to the checkbox.
       - Provides visual differentiation between different parenthesis. 

### Step 3: Learn how to print data in Terminal

#### Theory

In this tutorial we're going to use the **terminal** in order to interact with our program.  
You should be already familiar with Graphical User Interface (GUI) as you see it everywhere in modern world: 
- It's the graphical interface of OS  in Windows or Mac
- or a browser are GUI based.  

Terminal is also an interface to interact with your computer, but it's **text based**. It allows us to input data or output data in text format. 

Let's now learn how to output some data with Python and write our first program.  
In Python it's very simple, for that we use **the `print()` statement**.

> As you might have guessed, the print command prints something. But don't worry, it doesn't require a **physical printer** to do its job, instead it's going to print text in your **Terminal**.
{: .prompt-info }

Let's write the first program:
1. Open the VS Code.
2. Navigate to File -> Open Folder. 
3. Create a new folder with name `code` and open it.
4. On the right hand side click to Explorer
5. Right click on the empty space and select "New File"
6. Give the file a name, for example "test.py"
7. In the editor type the text below 
8. Click to the Run Python File button on the right top corner.
9. The result will be in the bottom part of VS Code - this is **Terminal**.

```python
print('hello world') 
```

> Note, that the text data in Python is called **string** and it's always surrounded by **quotes**.
{: .prompt-info }

> Congratulations, you wrote your first Python program 
{: .prompt-tip }

More about `print`:
- The `print` statement we just used is in fact a **function**
- You can execute a function by adding a pair of parenthesis `()` to it like this `print()`
- Functions can take input values which are called **arguments**
- The arguments are always inserted **inside the parenthesis**
- We're going to learn more about the functions later in this tutorial
- The `print` function can be used to print almost any type of data in Python: text, numbers, objects and so on
- If you just want to print a new line with no text simply use it with no arguments like this `print()`
- The print function in fact can take multiple arguments or values, you just need to separate them by `,`

Example of print function with two arguments:

```python
print('hello world', "hello universe") 
```

Note that we used single quotes to surround `'hello world'` and double quotes in `"hello universe"`. 
> In Python you can use either single or double quotes, but remember to put the same type of quotes at the beginning and the end of a string.
{: .prompt-info }

#### Practice 

Since we're going to create a calculator, we need to print results on the screen. Let's now pretend we have already calculated them. 

- The results are the numbers 77, 11 and 17
- For each number print 'the result is: ' and then the number
- Make sure to supply two arguments to the `print` function: first is text and the second is the number

#### Solution

```python
print('the result is: ', 77)
print('the result is: ', 11)
print('the result is: ', 17)
```

### Step 4: Learn how to enter data in Terminal

#### Theory

Since we're going to create a calculator, we somehow need to interact with user - ask them to enter numbers, and then provide a result.  

Let's now learn how to enter data in the terminal using Python. For that we use the **input()** function. 

About `input()`:
- We can put some text inside the `input()` function. 
- It will print this text first, and then will wait for user text data.
- You have to press the Enter key to actually execute it.

Example:

1. Run the below code:
```python
input('enter your name: ')
```
2. Enter your name and hit the enter key.

Here is what happens:
- As you noticed nothing happens after you hit the enter key.  
- The program just stops.  
- This is expected since we don't yet use the name we entered in the program.  
- To actually use the entered name we need to learn about **variables** in the next step.

#### Practice

Let's now practice how to enter data. 

- Ask a user to enter two numbers
- Use two `input()` statements for that
- The result should look like this:
  ```python
  enter first number: 70
  enter second number: 7
  ```

#### Solution

```python
input('enter first number: ')
input('enter second number: ')
```

### Step 5: Learn Variables

#### Theory.

What is the variable? 
- Objects with data are stored inside computer memory. 
- In the real world we use a post address when we need to visit some place or a building.
- Computers also use addresses to get access to a particular object in memory and it looks like this `0x00000284DE5A3E20`
- A variable is simply **a name** you give to a memory address where an object is stored.
- It's much simpler to remember that your data is located in a variable with name `data` rather than `0x00000284DE5A3E20`

> We use the equals sign "=" between variable name and an object we want to give this name to.
{: .prompt-info }

Let's use a variable in our first 'hello world' program, for now we simply give it the name "my_variable".
```python
my_variable = "hello world"
print(my_variable)
``` 

Here is what happens:
- We create a new variable and assign a string data to it.
- The print statement looks what memory address *variable*  represents.
- The print statement then fetches the text data in that memory location and outputs it into the terminal.

Let's also modify 'enter your name' program and use a variable to store the data a user enters:

```python
your_name = input("enter your name: ")
print(your_name)
```
Here is what happens:
- We create a new variable `your_name`
- `input("enter your name: ")` asks user to enter name in the Terminal. 
- As soon as user enters it and hits Enter key, input() sends this text to the `your_name` variable.
- The user's name is now stored inside this variable.
- The `print` statement then fetches the text data stored in an address represented by `your_name` and outputs it into the terminal.

> When a user enters their name it's going to be stored as **string**.
{: .prompt-info }


#### Practice. 

Let's now start writing our calculator. 

- We want a user to enter two numbers and then print them in the terminal.
- Create first variable which will represent first number and read this data from the Terminal using input() function.
- Similarly, create second variable which will represent second number and read this data from the Terminal.
- Print both numbers using one print statement.  
- The result should look like this:
  ```python
  enter first number: 70
  enter second number: 7
  70 7
  ```

#### Solution

```python
number_1 = input('enter first number: ')
number_2 = input('enter second number: ')
print(number_1, number_2)
```

### Step 6: Learn Strings

#### Theory.

Python allows you to merge two or more strings together. There are different methods to do it, but in this tutorial we'll focus on **string concatenation**.

We simply use the `+` sign with string concatenation:
```python
print('my name ' + "is " + "Python")
```
> Notice that I added extra space at the end of `'my name '` and `"is "`. 
> Without them it would result in `"my nameisPython"`.
{: .prompt-warning }

#### Practice. 

Let's modify a bit our calculator. 

- Re-use the code we wrote in Step 5
- In line 3 use string concatenation so it will print it like this:  `You entered NUMBER_1 and NUMBER_2`
- Where NUMBER_1 and NUMBER_2 are the actual numbers user enters.
- The result should look like this:
  ```python
  enter first number: 70
  enter second number: 7
  You entered 70 and 7
  ```
#### Solution

```python
number_1 = input('enter first number: ')
number_2 = input('enter second number: ')
print('You entered ' + number_1 + ' and ' + number_2)
```

### Step 7: Learn how to do Math in Python. 

#### Theory.

Doing Math in Python is easy. We just write a mathematical expression and that is it. For now, let's learn how to use **the most basic operators: `+`, `-`, `/` and `*`**.
```python
print(2 + 2)
print(2 - 2)
print(2 / 2)
print(2 * 2)
```

You now learned that the `+` operator has different behavior with strings and numbers:
- The `+` operator **merges strings** together (concatenation).
- The `+` operator performs the addition operation with numbers. 

But what if a number is surrounded by quotes like this `'11'`? 
Is it still number or a string?  

The answer is that in Python it's treated as a string regardless of operation.

To convert this `'11'` to actual numbers we need to use **the int() statement** like this:
```python
number = int('11')
```
> The process of conversion from string to a number and vice versa is called **casting**.
{: .prompt-info }

#### Practice. 

- Re-use the code we wrote in Step 6 to ask user to enter two numbers
- Calculate sum of two numbers and output it 
- The result should look like this:
  ```
  enter first number: 70
  enter second number: 7
  The sum is:  77
  ```

> Make sure to convert numbers in strings into actual numbers
{: .prompt-tip }

#### Solution

```python
number_1 = input('enter first number: ')
number_2 = input('enter second number: ')
number_1_casted = int(number_1)
number_2_casted = int(number_2)

sum_of_two = number_1_casted + number_2_casted
print('The sum is: ', sum_of_two)
```

### Step 8: Learn Conditional Statements

#### Theory: Overview

The Conditional Statements together with boolean operators and comparison operators allow us to define the **program flow**. This topic is quite big and there are lots of details to cover which might be overwhelming for a beginner.  
Therefore, in this section we'll cover only part of it, but nevertheless it should give you the sense of how it works. 

So far we've been executing all the lines of code one by one, from top to bottom. However, sometimes we want to skip some lines of our code because we want to use them only under certain circumstances.  
For that we use **the if, elif and else statements**. 

#### Theory: the if statement

The "if statement" basically asks a straightforward question which can only result in 'yes' or 'no'. If the answer is 'yes', then it results in **True** value and Python executes actions suitable for this event. If the answer is 'no', it results in **False** value, and the 'if' actions won't be executed.
The True and False values are called **booleans**.

Let's now check the example:
```python
A = 1
B = 2
if A == B:
    print("A equals to B event happened")
    D = A + B
```
> Note that there is a lot of whitespaces in the beginning of lines 4 and 5, this is called **a code block** and it's mandatory to have after the 'if', 'elif' or 'else' statements.
{: .prompt-info }

In the above example we do following:
- On the lines 1 and 2 we create two variables A and B.
- On the line 3 we ask Python if two variables are equal with the comparison operator `==`.
- If that would be the case, we say "print a text to the screen and create third variable D which is a sum of A and B". 
- Since in the above example variable A is not equal to B, the third line `A == B` will result in False 
- Therefore, the lines 4 and 5 will NOT be executed.

> Don't confuse assignment operator single `=` with comparison operator double `==`.
{: .prompt-warning }


#### Practice: the if statement

In the step 7 we've successfully created a simple program which can add two numbers together.  
Let's start gradually modifying it to handle different types of mathematical operations and apply what we've just learned.  

- Re-use the code we wrote in Step 7 to ask user to enter two numbers
- Ask a user to enter a mathematical operator  +, -, *, / : 
- Use the `if` statement to check if user enters `+` as the operator
- If that the case calculate the sum and print the result
- The result should look like this:
  ```
    enter first number: 70
    enter second number: 7
    enter math operator (+, -, *, /): +
    the result is: 77
  ```

#### Solution

```python
number_1 = int(input('enter first number: '))
number_2 = int(input('enter second number: '))
operator = input('enter math operator (+, -, *, /): ')

if operator == '+':
    print('the result is:', number_1 + number_2)
```

#### Theory: the else statement

So the if statement must always result in True and only then we can execute actions suitable for that event. But, what if we want to execute another set of actions after the 'if' statement results in False?  
**The else statement** allows us to achieve this intention.

Let's modify the previous example:
```python
A = 1
B = 2
if A == B:
    print("A equals to B event happened")
    D = A + B
else:
    print("A does NOT equal to B")
```

In the above example we do following:
- Create two variables A and B and check if they are equal on the 3rd line. 
- Since they are not equal, lines 4 and 5 won't be executed. 
- Therefore Python checks if there is `else` statement, and we have it present on the 6th line.
- Python then executes line 6 and prints text since it's inside the `else` block.

> The `else` statement cannot be used alone without the `if` statement.
{: .prompt-warning }

#### Practice: the else statement

Let's continue writing the calculator.  We're going to use the `else` statement as an indication that user didn't enter a math operator we have expected `+, -, *, /`. Therefore we want to handle this situation and print `Unknown operator`.

Here are the guidelines:
- Re-use the code we wrote in Step 8
- Write the else statement, its block should just print `Unknown operator`
- The result should look like this:
  ```
    enter first number: 70
    enter second number: 7
    enter math operator (+, -, *, /): ^
    Unknown operator
  ```

#### Solution

```python
number_1 = int(input('enter first number: '))
number_2 = int(input('enter second number: '))
operator = input('enter math operator (+, -, *, /): ')

if operator == '+':
    print('the result is:', number_1 + number_2)
else:
    print('Unknown operator')
```

#### Theory: the elif statement

So the `if` statement asks only one question, together with the `else` statement we can execute certain actions which would be suitable when an event occurs or doesn't occur.  

But, what if we wanted to ask multiple questions and do different actions based on their response?  

In Python we use **the `elif` statement** to address that. 

Here is the example where I added `elif` on line 7:
```python
A = 1
B = 2
C = 1
if A == B:
    print("A equals to B event happened")
    D = A + B
elif A == C:
    print("A equals to C event happened")
    D = A + C
else:
    print("A does NOT equal to B or to C")
```

In the above example we do following:
- On first 3 lines create three variables A, B and C.
- On line 4 Python checks if A and B are equal with `==` and it results in False so the lines 5 and 6 will be skipped.
- On line 7 we ask Python if A and C variables are equal, again with the use of the comparison operator `==`
- Since A and C are equal, the lines 8 and 9 will be executed and we print a text and then create variable D.
- Python will skip any code inside the `else` statement.

Here are the important concepts to know:
- The combination of `if`, `elif` and `else` statements forms one **Conditional Block**.
- In one single Conditional block, we can write one if statement, one else statement and multiple elif statements. 
- When have multiple checks with `if` and `elif` statements - as soon as one of them results in True, the rest statements won't be processed.
- Example: Python finds out that a condition in `if` block is True, and therefore it won't be executing `elif` and `else` blocks.
- We can however write multiple Conditional Blocks - each of them starts with `if`. 
  - In this situation Python will check all of those Conditional Blocks.  


#### Practice: the elif statement

Let's apply what we've just learned all together.  

Here are the guidelines:
- Re-use the code we previously wrote in Step 8
- We want to use the if, elif and else statement to check what is the math operator.
- Depending on the operator we want to execute the associated operation and print its result.
- If a user enters an invalid operator, we want to handle it and print text 'Unknown operator'.
- An example of the resulting program should look like this:
  ```
    enter first number: 70
    enter second number: 7
    enter math operator (+, -, *, /): -
    the result is: 63
  ```

#### Solution

```python
number_1 = int(input('enter first number: '))
number_2 = int(input('enter second number: '))
operator = input('enter math operator: +, -, *, / : ')

if operator == '+':
    print('the result is:', number_1 + number_2)
elif operator == '-':
    print('the result is:', number_1 - number_2)
elif operator == '*':
    print('the result is:', number_1 * number_2)
elif operator == '/':
    print('the result is:', number_1 / number_2)    
else:
    print('Unknown operator')
```

### Step 9: Learn Functions.

#### Theory.

We have already used two functions: `print()` and `input()`. It's now time to create our own function!

A function is basically **a block of some code** which has a name.  

Why do we need functions? There are two main reasons why you want to create them:
1. You want to hide a complexity of some operations
2. You have repeated blocks of code  

In both cases wrapping some block of code into a function can help to increase **readability** of your code. 

Let's now create a simple function which takes two strings as input, merges them and then prints output:

```python
def print_two_strings(string1, string2):
    merged_string = string1 + string2
    print(merged_string)
```

In the above code:
- The first line is the function signature:
  - A function always starts with `def` keyword
  - Then you define the function name, in our case it's `print_two_strings`
  - Then you define what input values a function takes
- The second line:
  - Concatenates two strings together in `string1 + string2`
  - Creates a new variable with name `merged_string`
  - The result of concatenation is stored in the variable `merged_string`
- The third line uses the `print` function to show a result in the terminal.

If you will try to run just this block of code nothing is going to happen. That is because we need a separate line of code to execute our function like this:
```python
print_to_strings('hello ', 'user')
```

> This separate line of code we just wrote above has its own name - *a function call*. 
{: .prompt-tip }

> Note that to execute or *call* a function you need to use parenthesis `()` after a function name. 
{: .prompt-info }

#### Practice.

Here are the guidelines for this practice section:
- You need to create 4 different functions
- Each of these function performs its own mathematical operation:
  - The first adds two numbers together and prints the result
  - The second subtracts first number from second number and prints the result
  - The third adds multiplies numbers together and prints the result
  - The fourth divides first number by second number and prints the result
- Modify the condition block in previously created code to use these functions.


#### Solution
```python
def add(number_1, number_2):
  result = number_1 + number_2
  print(result)

def subtract(number_1, number_2):
  result = number_1 - number_2
  print(result)

def multiply(number_1, number_2):
  result = number_1 * number_2
  print(result)

def divide(number_1, number_2):
  result = number_1 / number_2
  print(result)

number_1 = int(input('enter first number: '))
number_2 = int(input('enter second number: '))
operator = input('enter math operator: +, -, *, / : ')

if operator == '+':
    add(number_1, number_2)
elif operator == '-':
    subtract(number_1, number_2)
elif operator == '*':
    multiply(number_1, number_2)
elif operator == '/':
    divide(number_1, number_2)    
else:
    print('Unknown operator')
```